Add loop-contracts support for `for` loop (#4143)
model-checking/kani: docs/src/reference/experimental/loop-contracts.md

> # Loop Invariants

Reviewer: If the renaming is something that was agreed on, it should be done in a separate PR. Adding support for "for" loops already requires so many changes, so we should avoid convoluting it with other unrelated changes.

## Introduction

Loop-invariants are used to specify invariants for loops for the sake of extending Kani's *bounded proofs* to *unbounded proofs*.
A [loop-invariant](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Loop_invariant) is an expression that holds upon entering a loop and after every execution of the loop body.
It captures something that does not change about every step of the loop.

It is worth revisiting the discussion about [bounded proof](../../tutorial-loop-unwinding.md#bounded-proof) and
[loop unwinding](../../tutorial-loop-unwinding.md#loops-unwinding-and-bounds). In short, bounds on the number of times Kani unwinds loops also bound the size of inputs,
and hence result in a bounded proof.

> Loop-invariants are used to abstract out loops as non-loop blocks to avoid loop unwinding, and hence remove the bounds on the inputs.

Reviewer: Please replace all occurrences of "Loop-invariants" with "Loop invariants" (i.e. remove the dash).

# Loop Contracts

## Introduction

Loop contracts are used to specify invariants for loops for the sake of extending Kani's *bounded proofs* to *unbounded proofs*.

> A [loop contract](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Loop_invariant) is an expression that holds upon entering a loop and after every execution of the loop body.

Reviewer: I think while reverting the changes, you changed some current occurrences of "loop invariant" to "loop contract".

```

In this program, the loop repeatedly decrements `x` until it equals `1`. Because we haven't specified an upper bound for `x`, to verify this function,

> Kani needs to unwind the loop for `u64::MAX` iterations, which is computationally expensive. Loop invariants allow us to abstract the loop behavior, significantly reducing the verification cost.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Kani needs to unwind the loop for `u64::MAX` iterations, which is intractable. Loop invariants allow us to abstract the loop behavior, significantly reducing the verification cost.
```

}
```

Here, the loop-invariant `#[kani::loop_invariant(x >= 1)]` specifies that the condition `x >= 1` must hold true at the start of each iteration before the loop guard is
checked. Once Kani verifies that the loop-invariant is inductive, it will use the invariant to abstract the loop and avoid unwinding. 

Now let's run the proof with loop-invariants through kani:
``` bash
kani simple_loop_with_loop_invariants.rs  -Z loop-contracts
```
The output reported by Kani on the example will be
```
...

Check 10: simple_loop_with_loop_invariants.loop_invariant_base.1
         - Status: SUCCESS
         - Description: "Check invariant before entry for loop simple_loop_with_loop_invariants.0"
         - Location: simple_while_loop.rs:15:5 in function simple_loop_with_loop_invariants

> Check 11: simple_loop_with_loop_invariants.loop_assigns.1

Reviewer: Was `loop_modifies` renamed to `loop_assigns` in this PR? I'm not clear where this is done.

Author: It was an accident when I replace all loop_assigns to loop_modifies, I will correct it.

}
```

Here, the loop contract `#[kani::loop_invariant(x >= 1)]` specifies that the condition `x >= 1` must hold true at the start of each iteration before the loop guard is

> checked. Once Kani verifies that the loop contract is inductive, it will use the invariant to abstract the loop and avoid unwinding. 

Reviewer 2: I believe this change should be reverted, the previous text was IMHO correct.

         - Description: "Check invariant before entry for loop simple_loop_with_loop_contracts.0"
         - Location: simple_while_loop.rs:15:5 in function simple_loop_with_loop_contracts

> Check 11: simple_loop_with_loop_contracts.loop_assigns.1

Reviewer 2: Should this really be changed?

    x = x - 1;
    assert!(x >= 1); // check that loop-invariant is inductive.
    kani::assume(false) // block this proof path.
}
// proof path 2:
//   loop-invariant is satisfied and loop guard is violated.
assert!(x == 1);
```
That is, we assume that we are in an arbitrary iteration after checking that the loop-invariant holds for the base case. With the inductive hypothesis (`kani::assume(x >= 1);`),
we will either enter the loop (proof path 1) or leave the loop (proof path 2). We prove the two paths separately by killing path 1 with `kani::assume(false);`.
Note that all assertions after `kani::assume(false)` will be ignored as `false => p` can be deduced as `true` for any `p`.

In proof path 1, we prove properties inside the loop and at last check that the loop-invariant is inductive.

In proof path 2, we prove properties after leaving the loop. As we leave the loop only when the loop guard is violated, the post condition of the loop can be expressed as
`!guard && inv`, which is `x <= 1 && x >= 1` in the example. The postcondition implies `x == 1`—the property we want to prove at the end of `simple_loop_with_loop_invariants`.

> ## Historic values and extra variables

Reviewer: The documentation of historic values is unrelated to this PR, so should be moved to its own PR.

### Historic values

We support two notations for historic values in loop-invariants:
1. `on_entry(expr)` : The value of the `expr` before entering the loop.
2. `prev(expr)` : the value of `expr` in the previous iteration. Note that Kani will assert that the loop has at least one iteration of `prev` is used in loop-invariants.

Example:
```Rust
#[kani::proof]
pub fn loop_with_old_and_prev() {
    let mut i = 100;
    #[kani::loop_invariant((i >= 2) && (i <= 100) && (i % 2 == 0) && (on_entry(i) == 100) && (prev(i) == i + 2))]
    while i > 2 {
        if i == 1 {
            break;
        }
        i = i - 2;
    }
    assert!(i == 2);
}
```

### Extra variables in `for` loop

There are two extra variables that can be used in loop-invariants for `for` loops:
1. `kaniindex` : the position (index) of the current iteration in the iterator.

> 2. `kaniiterlen` : the length of the iterator.

Author: 1. We don't want to change user code in order to write a loop invariant. kaniiter and kaniindex are useful variables for loop-invariant, so I think it is helpful to provide them to the users. In case the users use enumerate, the index of the Enumerate Iterator is also different from kaniindex as only kaniindex is updated at the end of the loop body as demonstrated in [nested_forloop_for_enumerate.rs].  
2. All extra variables are put together with a loop inside a block {} (by the proc macro) , so if the user defines variables with similar names, the loop-invariant always takes the ones that is generated by kani. I don't think user may name their variables that way unless they want to "hack" kani.

> 2. `kaniiterlen` : the length of the iterator.

Reviewer: I tend to agree with @carolynzech here. It is customary to modify code for verification purposes, e.g. through adding "ghost" variables that are only used in invariants. I would vote for not exposing those variables.

> 2. `kaniiterlen` : the length of the iterator.

Reviewer 2: But if we don't expose those variables, how are people going to express those loop invariants? Above, Thanh already explained how the approach with `enumerate()` wouldn't work.

> 2. `kaniiterlen` : the length of the iterator.

Reviewer: I discussed with @thanhnguyen-aws offline and the reason `enumerate` wouldn't work is because of how we implemented it, but it should be possible to fix the implementation to make it work (@thanhnguyen-aws please correct me if I misunderstood).

One concern I raised with @thanhnguyen-aws is that exposing those variables means that we're committing to providing them for all possible iterator types. While an "index" shouldn't be an issue, "len" might not be easy to provide for all iterators (e.g. [the Chars iterator](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/str/struct.Chars.html)). So if we decide to drop one of those variables in the future, this would break user code.

To illustrate the key idea, we show how Kani abstracts the loop in `simple_loop_with_loop_contracts` as a non-loop block:
``` Rust
assert!(x >= 1) // check loop contract for the base case.
x = kani::any();
kani::assume(x >= 1);
if x > 1 {
    // proof path 1:
    //   both loop guard and loop contract are satisfied.
    x = x - 1;
    assert!(x >= 1); // check that loop contract is inductive.
    kani::assume(false) // block this proof path.
}
// proof path 2:
//   loop contract is satisfied and loop guard is violated.
assert!(x == 1);
```
That is, we assume that we are in an arbitrary iteration after checking that the loop contract holds for the base case. With the inductive hypothesis (`kani::assume(x >= 1);`),
we will either enter the loop (proof path 1) or leave the loop (proof path 2). We prove the two paths separately by killing path 1 with `kani::assume(false);`.
Note that all assertions after `kani::assume(false)` will be ignored as `false => p` can be deduced as `true` for any `p`.

> In proof path 1, we prove properties inside the loop and at last check that the loop contract is inductive.

Reviewer 2: I think these specific changes from `invariant` to `contract` should also be reverted.

Reviewer 3: For me, loops have contracts that come in many forms: modifies or "assigns", invariants, "variant" or "decreases" contracts and so on.

A "loop invariant" is one type of "loop contract" which has a specific meaning and use in verification.

So... say "loop contract" when you mean any one of them. Say "loop invariant" when you specifically mean the thing that really is the invariant of the loop.

This conversation should not be necessary in 2025!

Loop contracts comes with the following limitations.

> 1. `while` loops, `loop` loops are supported. `for` loops are supported for array, slice, Iter, Vec, Range, StepBy, Chain, Zip, Map, and Enumerate. The other kinds of loops are not supported: [`while let` loops](https://doc.rust-lang.org/reference/expressions/loop-expr.html#predicate-pattern-loops).

Reviewer 3: As you write the examples, add them as new tests cases obviously.

> 1. `while` loops, `loop` loops are supported. `for` loops are supported for array, slice, Iter, Vec, Range, StepBy, Chain, Zip, Map, and Enumerate. The other kinds of loops are not supported: [`while let` loops](https://doc.rust-lang.org/reference/expressions/loop-expr.html#predicate-pattern-loops).

Reviewer 3: I would also like to see test cases where functions are declared inside a module with full pre/post-conditions contracts, rather than the "assume/assert test harness" style. We'll be using the former style in Crypto work, so you need to convince me that it really does work that way.

> 1. `while` loops, `loop` loops are supported. `for` loops are supported for array, slice, Iter, Vec, Range, StepBy, Chain, Zip, Map, and Enumerate. The other kinds of loops are not supported: [`while let` loops](https://doc.rust-lang.org/reference/expressions/loop-expr.html#predicate-pattern-loops).

Author: Hello, thank you very much for your suggestion.
1. I updated the document (loop-contracts.md file), which includes the kaniindex.
2. You can find the example in this file too. 
3. The nested loop for `for` loop needs one extra component: the loop_assign clause because sometimes CBMC cannot infer it for the inner loop. I am implementing it and expect to finish next week. I will add that example after both PRs are merged.
4. Currently, Kani does not support fully unbounded slices, but it supports slices of arbitrary length. Please take a look at the file for_loop_for_slice, we consider a slice (`s`) unbounded when we set the length of `a` to be `isize::MAX`. However, until array theory is supported (we are working on it), the performance is unscalable w.r.t array size (slice length).
5. You can find examples of function-contracts in tests/expected/function-contracts.

> 1. `while` loops, `loop` loops are supported. `for` loops are supported for array, slice, Iter, Vec, Range, StepBy, Chain, Zip, Map, and Enumerate. The other kinds of loops are not supported: [`while let` loops](https://doc.rust-lang.org/reference/expressions/loop-expr.html#predicate-pattern-loops).

Reviewer 3: Iteration and quantification over unbounded slices will be required for crypto work (e.g. where we're computing a function over a potentially very large array of bytes, such as a user-supplied message.)

I do not see the need for a scaling problem. The proofs can be generated in a fashion that is entirely symbolic with respect to the bounds of the slice. This is how it works in tools like Frama-C and SPARK Pro.
